# The Transformer Architecture

## Learning Objectives
1. Summarize the key components of transformer architecture:
   - Positional embeddings
   - Encoder
   - Decoder
   - Attention (query, key, and value matrices)
   - Skip connections
   - Layer normalization
   - MLP  
2. Explain and visualize the attention mechanism (self-attention) and two of its extensions:
   - masked attention
   - multi-head attention.
3. Translate the mathematical expression of the attention head into code.
4. Describe transformer architecture referencing 
   - Attention
   - Feed-forward
   - Skip connection
   - Layer norm
   - Positional embedding
   - Decoding
5. Explain the capabilities and limitations of transformers referencing the fixed context window, quadratic scaling.
6. Implement multi-head masked attention. 
7. Reflect on how everyday human interactions create shared meaning and social value
8. Aalyze what may be lost when they are replaced by automated systems.
9. Identify and map stakeholders
   - their values
   - Their influence
   - Recognizing how technologies can be viewed differently across communities.
10. Design a mini-engagement plan using appropriate methods to ensure that diverse perspectives meaningfully shape the design and use of AI projects.

## Glossary

**Transformer Architecture**:

**Attention weights**: How much the representation of each token in a prompt matters for the prediction of the generated token.

**Input embeddings**: embeds every token into a learned high-dimensional digital representation.

**Transformer blocks**: input embeddings are processed through multiple transformer blocks stacked on top of each other, similar to the hidden layers in a MLP. 
- The input to the first transformer block consists of the input embeddings.
- Each subsequent block receives the output from the previous one and aggregates it.
- Each token's representation is enriched with context from all preceding tokens.

**Output layer**: Ususlly uses a SoftMax activation function to predict a probability distribution over all possible next tokens.

**Contextual hidden representations**: token embeddings that combine information from the current token with information from the previous tokens.

**Layer**: A level of token representations.

**Contextual embeddings**: Each token's representation is enriched with context from all preceding tokens.
- A weighted sum of contextual representations of all previous tokens.

**Attention heads**: Components in a neural network that compute the attention weight vector to compute contextual embeddings. 

**Content-based dot product self-attention**: The specific type of attention mechanism used by transformer models.

**Projection**: is a transformation through matrix multiplication that allows each token to take different roles.
- Possible roles:
  - Query
  - Key
  - Value

**Query projection $(\mathbf{q_i})$**: Represents the current token that is actively seeking information.

**Key projection $(\mathbf{k_j})$**: Represents a token $(\mathbf{j})$ in the sequence that is offering information. 
- It acts as a label or an index for that token's content. 

**Value projection $(\mathbf{v_j})$**: Represents the content of a token that should be passed along if it’s deemed relevant. 
- After the model decides which words are most relevant (based on the query-key comparison), 
it retrieves the value vectors of those tokens to build a new, 
context-rich representation of the original token.

**Logits**: The raw, unnormalized prediction scores generated by the final layer of a neural network.

**Positional embeddings**:

**Encoder**:

**Decoder**:

**Attention**:

**Skip connections**:

**Layer normalization**:

**MLP**: The Multi-Layer Perceptron 